 Dynamic Memory Allocation CSE 220: Systems Programming
Ethan Blanton & Carl Alphonce
Department of Computer Science and Engineering University at Buffalo

 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Dynamic Memory Allocation
We have discussed two kinds of memory allocation:
Static allocation Global variables
Static local or global variables Dynamic allocation
Automatic variables Manually allocated memory
We covered automatic variables in depth, now it’s time for manual allocations!


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
The Dynamic Allocator
The interface to the dynamic allocator is malloc() et al. However, the underlying mechanism is more complex.
The operating system kernel provides only large allocations. Its minimum allocation on x86-64 is typically 4 KB.
The dynamic allocator must efficiently parcel out these allocations.


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
The System Break
The OS heap occupies the memory above the BSS.
To the OS, it is one large block of memory.
The dynamic allocator must manage it.
The OS provides one tool for this: the system break.
0xffffffffffffffff
 Kernel
 Process Stack
  Unmapped
  Heap
 BSS
 Data
 Text
(program code)
 Unmapped
0x0 (NULL)
brk


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Managing the System Break
The system break marks the boundary of the heap.
It is the address of the first byte that isn’t on the heap. It can be moved with two system calls:
brk(): set the break to an address
sbrk(): move the break a relative number of bytes
A dynamic allocator can use this to request memory from the OS.


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
sbrk()
The sbrk() system call moves the system break: void *sbrk(intptr_t increment);
It returns the old location of the system break. A positive break value expands the heap.
This means sbrk() works a little bit like malloc: void *mem = sbrk(size);


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Allocation API
The original Unix allocator required explicit sizes: both allocating and freeing memory took a size.
The malloc() allocator does not.
This means that it must store that size somewhere!
There are many allocation strategies with different solutions to this problem.


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Metadata
Metadata1 is stored for heap allocations. This metadata allows for:
Identifying available memory on the heap Determining the size of allocated memory for free() Locating regions of memory that make up the heap ...
How this metadata is stored and managed can vary. 1Metadata is data about data.


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Allocation Blocks
Assume that the dynamic allocator allocates blocks of memory. Each block contains:
Any metadata that is required for the allocator Memory available to the user to serve an allocation
The set of all of these blocks makes up the heap.


 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Explicit Metadata
When explicit metadata is in use, the block might contain: An integer containing the size of the block
A flag indicating whether it is free or in use
This data is stored adjacent to, or nearby, the user memory:¶
 Flags Size
Application Memory
 Heap Block

 
 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Free Lists
A common allocation management technique is: Blocks containing explicit sizes
Free blocks placed on a linked list Sometimes allocated blocks may also be on a list.
When the user asks for memory, available memory is located on this list.


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Sharing Space
Sometimes metadata is required only when a block is free. This metadata can be stored inside the application memory
portion of the block.
Since the block is not in use, this memory is available. This reduces the overhead of free memory blocks.
  Flags Size
Application Memory
 Free Metadata

 
 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Overhead
Allocators have overhead.
This is extra memory used only by the allocator. It is important to minimize this overhead.
There are two primary sources of overhead:
Metadata Fragmentation


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Fragmentation
Fragmentation is space used by the allocator that is not useful to the application.
Sometimes metadata is included in fragmentation. There are two kinds of fragmentation:
Internal: unused memory inside a heap block External: unused memory between heap blocks


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Internal Fragmentation
Internal fragmentation is like packing in a structure.
It is memory that is required by the allocator, but not useful. It often arises because allocator blocks either:
Must be aligned
Have limited possible sizes
For example: an allocator only creates blocks of size 2k, but the user asks for 2k – 1 bytes of memory.


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
External Fragmentation
External fragmentation is due to user allocation patterns. The allocator has free blocks, but they are not suitable.
 32B
 32B
 64B
32B
   What if:
this is the entire heap
the user wants a 64B block?
free
used


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Exploration
Let’s explore some of these concepts in diagrams.


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
Summary
The OS notion of the heap is very simplistic. The dynamic allocator has to manage the heap. Metadata is required for management.
The heap can become fragmented:
Internal fragmentation is inside heap blocks. External fragmentation is between heap blocks.


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
References I
Required Readings
[1] Randal E. Bryant and David R. O’Hallaron. Computer Science: A Programmer’s Perspective. Third Edition. Chapter 9: 9.9, 9.11. Pearson, 2016.


 
 Introduction The OS “Heap” Managing the Heap Metadata and Overhead Summary References
License
Copyright 2020–2023 Ethan Blanton, All Rights Reserved. Copyright 2022, 2023 Carl Alphonce, All Rights Reserved. Copyright 2019 Karthik Dantu, All Rights Reserved.
Reproduction of this material without written consent of the author is prohibited.
To retrieve a copy of this material, or related materials, see https://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~eblanton/.


 