All right. We're going to get started today, as you can hear. I'm going to go ahead and leave this on deafening so I don't have to shout. I'm going to do my best today. We'll just keep going until I can't talk anymore and then we'll be done. All right. I have a pocket full of holes and I have something to drink up here. And we'll see how far it gets me. And I apologize that you have to listen to this. I actually have to turn this down. Anyway, it's ringing. And how's that? Is that okay? Can you guys hear me okay? I mean, I had covered the week before school and I still had some crap in my throat. And I was like, It's going to be fine. It's going to be fines can be fine. Wednesday night, it was no longer fine. I was hoping yesterday would be enough, but it wasn't. So what we're going to do today is sort of pick up where we left off on Monday. There were some questions on Piazza and I made one of them public so you all can see it. So please get in the habit of browsing through your other your fellow classmates questions on Piazza. I really apologize for what this sounds like. I'm sorry. I can hear that. It's gross, but I can't do anything about it. Get in the habit of browsing through your classmates questions, I'll be honest. But one of the questions said basically, Hey, on Tuesday we didn't get through the entire lecture. We can get through all the material. Should we just read it and study in Rome? Now, two things. One, and I think I mentioned this in class, although there's three sections, maybe it wasn't mentioned in one of the sections. We're not actually going to do the slides for this lecture, like we've already done all the slides, We're going to do the rest of it we're going to do in the terminal. We'll cover all the material. Those slides are for you. When you want to go back to review, write all the information we're going to talk about in the terminals, also in those slides. But two, the slide decks do not necessarily correspond to lecture periods. We try, but it's frequently the case that we won't finish a slide deck and we'll come back the next election period and we'll finish the slide deck and that's fine. Second question Somebody asked about required readings so that I was heard there were required readings. I don't know what they are. Two things. One, there's this document. Some of you have seen it before, so most of you have heard that it exists. Every course is required to give it to you. It's called a syllabus. It has your required reading set. Now, later in the semester, we may give you some required readings that aren't on the syllabus because I think we talked about this. We dropped the one textbook as a required resource, so we may give you some alternate required readings, but in every single lecture at the back of the slides, if you go to. References up here in the top right, there will be a set of readings. There will be required readings. There will be optional readings. They're at the back of every single set of slides we will give you. We will not go over them basically, ever. They're just there back there. Once we've done a set of slides. You need to go to the back. You need to look at the readings. You need to do your readings promptly. How promptly? Somebody asked that. Where would you think you might find that information? In the syllabus. It tells you how promptly. So I'm not going to say it right now. So that's that. What else? Programing assignment zero releases today. It's available on Newbie learns right now. There will be a passive post later today that will give you some more details on how we do programing assignments and how they work. But it's available right now on you be learns it is due one week from today. Next Friday you're going to have to write some C code between now and next Friday. Now it's number zero for two reasons. One in C arrays started zero. So naturally as programing as I'm in zero two. It's a very short, relatively straightforward and easy programing assignment. I do not say that to scare you because some of you are going to find it quite difficult, but you're going to find it quite difficult. Not because the programing is difficult because the environment in which you're programing, it is new to you. Right. So programing assignment zero. The programing is not the hard part. Learning enough C to do the programing is the hard part, right? The future assignments will be larger. They will be more complicated. If everything goes well for you, programing Assignment zero is not going to take you very long. Don't say to yourself, this is what 220 assignments are like. I'm going to budget 35 minutes a week to do my assignments. It will end badly. Programing assignment one will be larger, two will be larger than that, etc., etc. Right. Any questions about logistics? Oh. Seven mins says more times than I plan to give to logistics. Yes, sir. And with more of this understanding that we just about as many times as possible. Okay, that's a good question. And the answer is no. Says this somewhere one of the 200 documents I'm giving you. Well, the answer sort of. We might put a hard limit. Generally speaking, you may submit a reasonable number of times. Last semester we had people submitting like 100 times, 150 times. That is not a reasonable number. So it's really, you know. Yeah. Or six. Maybe you have a huge problem and you just everything's crashing down and burning and you can't figure out why you're not actually solving a problem. You submit 12 times. You know, that's not great, but it's okay. 12. It's like, that's okay. 150 is not okay. Why is 150 not okay? You are abusing it. But like, why specifically if you submit 150 times. What are you doing wrong? I understand you're not thinking right. It's not that you're not understanding is you're not thinking. Here's like, I'm going to change this and resubmit it. See if I get some points. Right. You can't fix programs that way, right? For a friend of mine in college. Used to call it programing by Brownian motion, because no Brownian motion is like an A gas or a liquid. All the particles are just sort of vibrating and moving around randomly in different directions. And when you're spending 150 times to order greater, you're programing by Brownian motion. You're just sort of vibrating and randomly moving around some code, seeing if it solves the problems. Now, there exists the possibility it is not outside of the possibility in the world of quantum reality that we live in, that all of the particles in this bottle could randomly move into the configuration of ice crystals, and this could just freeze right here at room temperature on the spot. It's not going to happen. It's not very likely. There's billions and billions of particles in here. They all have to do exactly the right thing. When you're programing by Browning Brownian motion, there exists the possibility that the correct program will come out. It's possible it's not going to happen. There's hundreds of thousands, millions of choices you can make. And the random ones probably aren't the right ones. Right? When you're submitting 150 times, you're not solving the problem. You're hoping that you'll just accidentally get it right. Okay. I didn't plan to make that speech today. You other questions? Yes, sir. That's really what's interesting, at least for me. I don't know what you're talking about. So we'll have to take that up later. There should only be one level one, and it's due next Wednesday, right? Normal. Your labs are due on Monday. But because of our drop in the holiday, it's like one special. It's two almost. But you should all do it in a lab. Okay, let's do some programing. I've talked too much. I only have a limited number of words today, so we left off on Wednesday. Yeah, Wednesday. We had done puts and we had done put care and we had looked at the minimal possible C program. Right. We'd done some of these things. This is basically the minimal possible C program. Right. While we're here, I'll ask you a question about that. Oh, promoter. Oh, tough day. Okay. I'll ask you a question about that. In this minimal possible C program. Go ahead, get on to talk about there is a return value in main, right? It's in main and there's a return value. It's an N. And on Wednesday, we talked about what that is and what it means. What is the significance of the value returned and main? Does their main function not return value? Is the value returned by main arbitrary? Does it not matter at all? Does returning zero indicate that your program ran correctly and terminated normally, or does returning zero indicate that your program had a problem and aborted in some fashion? And so I just I guess he just left on the side of. Glad we had that job. Okay, so what do people think? These are the answers we are doing. What I want you to do is take 30 seconds, 45 seconds, chat with your neighbors, talk about what you think this return value from Maine means, and why we have the return value and why we're using it. Then we'll do this again. As a reminder, it's quite possible this is the only quiz question we'll do today. If you weren't here for this quiz question, you don't get attendance for today, right? You can miss 30 days. No, you have to come to 30 days. If you don't come to 30 days, you feel the course. I'm preaching to the choir because you're all here right now. But the people on video are hearing this for the first time potentially. So please remember, you have to be here for the quizzes. Take 30 seconds, talk to your neighbors. What is the return value for me and why do we use it? I can't. I can't do Texaco dance class. So I didn't. I thought my top hat was just for last night. I thought I was going to apologize. I can't do tech support during class. Hitting some bumps hasn't come back. Office house. The forecast out this week doesn't count. Got. Thank you. All right. No, that's not what it's supposed to show me. Okay. Now we're going to do this again. Now, almost everybody got this. Not supposed to tell you this. Almost everybody got this right the first time, right? There are big questions in this class. We're not. Almost everybody will get it right. Right. So then we'll have this whole discussion period. You'll talk to each other and we'll run it again. If. Well, now it's a 60 seconds because we got to get better at our top hat game. Supposed to give you 30 seconds the second time. Right? To resubmit. Reminder that this week top hat doesn't count. All right, We're doing this to make sure everything's working. Starting next week, top hats going to count, right? What's going to happen is we'll have some of these questions if you get it wrong. You miss a point for that question or whatever. Then we run it again. You get it right. You get your point for that question. At the end of the lecture period, we take all of the quizzes that we did during the day and we average all of those scores, right? So most of you are going to get most of your points for top hat if you come, right, if you miss a point here or there. So give it your best shot. Give it your answer. If you miss a point here or there, it's going to be okay because the averages will wind up being high. All right. Normally, there's going to be 30 seconds. I'm going to go ahead and stop this. How do I stop this? I'm not going to stop this because I don't know how. And it stopped on its own. So the goal here is that we go to responses and they're all correct. This was the wrong question. Right? How was the question? That was the question from Monday. All right. I have to learn how to use top hat. That's supposed to be the same question again. I have to learn how to use top. No, I don't have to learn how to use top hat for money. What are we doing on Monday? Nothing. Nothing. I've learned top hat for Wednesday. Oh, there's still people who missed this. Guys, the person who said you can use Chegg, that you're going to fail this course with an F because you're going to be in my office for cheating. Go read your syllabus. That document I talked about earlier. It's a great document. I mean, it's like it's almost a novella, right? It's like 15 pages long or something. Okay. All right. I don't wanna talk about this anymore because I messed it up. That's what we do with things. We mess up. We just sweep it under the carpet. Okay. Sorry. Now, the next thing I want to talk about, remember, we have this pound include as tedious an H at the top. And it tells the C compiler tells the preprocessor to tell the C compiler that there are a whole bunch of functions related to input and output that exist. One of these functions is print f. If you remember on Wednesday we did something like this, right? And we used puts and puts, took and wrote this string to the output or another function C called print F and I could just do this. Now I have to do things a little bit differently in that I have to put a backslash in at the end of the line, puts automatically writes the string that you gave it and then writes a new line, right? So the cursor moves to the next line. Pranav does not. So I can replace that puts with a print F and then if I save my file, I hit control X control S to save in Emacs. But there's a menu you can hit file, save. We talked about this last time. We've already seen it like, I don't know, 55 times on Piazza. And you don't save your files, then they're not visible to other programs, right? You have to. You have to save your file. So I saved my file. So if I come over here, I can look at this file. There's the file, right? I can see that it exists. I'm going to use a dash option here that showed print to GTC, which is, instead of my output being named eight on out, it's going to be named print. I'm going to compile this. When I run it, we're going to see that it did exactly what puts it. Now, this is of limited interest to us, right? We can already do this last time. We don't necessarily need this isn't necessarily improving our value. But I can do. Let me just say. Was the canonical value for an X that we don't care about. There's a right answer to this question. Somebody knows it. Put your hand up. I'll knows it. What's the canonical value for x if we don't care? Zero. Well, that's a good good guess. It's a good guess. It's one of the three one of the two numbers you can write in a program without a name, right? Yes, sir. 42. It's 42. Why is it 42? It stands as the answer to life, the universe and everything. If you don't know what that is, then kids these days have no culture. But you can. You can look it up on the Internet while you're there. If you're a computer, hit up DuckDuckGo. Right? We don't use Google or Bing or whatever. We use DuckDuckGo and search for roundabouts. Okay. For me, if you live on campus, search for sidewalks, walking. Put down phone. Okay. For me. Because when I come in in the morning, it's rough. So I can do this. I say in my print statement, I put this percent D And what Pranav is going to do is it's going to take that percent D percent D says decimal, right, Decimal integer. This is going to confuse a lot of you because you think decimal is the point between the numbers, but it's not. That's what means base ten. We'll talk a freakin whole lot more about that in like week three or four. So I want to print a decimal integer and I don't know what that integer is. And then we put after our string, we put comma X, and what we're saying is the decimal integer that I want you to print is X, right? And so if I compile and run this. Do I have it? I don't. Okay, I'll get that. Go to print X equals 42. I said x equals percent D. It said x equals 42. It replaced 2% D with the value of x. Right. That I wanted. This is called and this is a dumb name, but this is what we call it. This is called an expand. No, it's just what it's called. There are a bunch of these. So if I want to put a decimal integer, I can say percent D. But if I had a floating point number, we'll talk about the difference between decimal points and integers of floating point numbers later. I have double f equals. What is the canonical floating point number when you don't know? There's a couple of good answers to this. Give me a floating point number that I should use as an example. 3.7 Y. 3.7 it does, but Y is 3.7 a good number? You just like 3.7. Okay. No, I'm not going to take that as a correct answer. Yes. Yeah, that's a great number, right? Like we could say 3.1415927. Right. That's a good that's one point. What It's by Right. What's another good number. Maybe 1.414. That's a good number, right? What's that key? No, it's close square, too. Right? Or it's French. 0.771.727. There's two correct answers in this question. Do you guys not, like, take physics or anything? It's square root of two over two or bonus. Answer one over the square root of two through the same value to prove why that is. Well, it's another good one. 99.4. For there's only one person in this room other than me who knows why. This is a magic number. Don't fail me again. You fail me the first time. Let's think about for a second. Who knows what 99.44 is either. So it is 99 and 44 100% pure, Right. It used to be commercials in the eighties. All right. Anyway, so you should pick good numbers, right? Good numbers. I'm going to leave you with one. All right. We use that number in scientific notation and see, you guys should know what that is. You can guess. Right. And then I can print this out. Oh, I've made mistakes. What mistake do I make, huh? You live here? No. Well, yes, I did. 6.2, two times ten to the. No, that's right. Right. That's. That's Avogadro's number. Okay, now I've got to write a note. That is not exactly what we printed. We'll talk more about that later. Right. That's not 6.22. That's 6.19. Right. We'll talk about that later. I did forget the new line. I put the new line in. So this is not interesting, right? You're like, Why do I care about this? Because this is the only way. It's not the only way. It's the most convenient way we have. And see to print out values that are in variables. You're never actually going to say, you know, F equals 3.14 and then print out 3.14. Right. But you are going to have variables that you're going to want to print that have values that you can't predict ahead of time. Right. You're gonna want to print debugging statements where every time through a loop you say I is whatever and you know, the loop calculation value is whatever, right? For an F is how we do this. We use these, expand those. If you go to the back of K and ah, it will have a list of all of these possible expand those or if you go in your terminal or I'll do it in Emacs here too. Man. Right. All X man print F and I want print f three, not print F 1.3. It's going to give me the man page. Right. This is the main page on a unique system. We said this last time. I said, Hey, you can use your man pages on a unique system. The entire programmer's manual is available online. You can get to it any time you're using the computer. You go to the prompt and you say, Man space, man for manual space. And then the page that you want to know about, right? In this case, I want to know about print F So I said, print F and then you can give it a section. So I said, I won't want print F one, I want print F three. Section three of the manual is the library's right, print F one is something different. This is in almost all of your handouts. There's a little blurb about how to use man pages. Right? If you forget. So I can do this now. If I'm in Emacs, I can do all X man and do the same thing. Or what's better than man? There's a right answer to this question. It's better than man. I see. You got me. What's better than man documentation? No. You guys are really. It's having a tough time. Yeah. WOMAN That's right. So we do Emacs. Woman And we say print if we want, print up three. And here's Pranav in Emacs. You can use. MAN one. The difference is that man calls an external program and gets the manual page put into Emacs through an external program. Woman Does it entirely in the scripting language. It's built within Emacs. It has some nice things. It has like links to other man pages that you can click right and stuff like that. So, okay, if I go to Max Mann and I look at Pranav, it tells me everything there is no about Pranav. Now, Pranav is a little bit of an unfortunate example because it's really complicated. But one of the things that has down here is it says, you know, I can do. Where am I? Right, like, right here. So as well, this is the thing that I can do. And it says this is what these things mean. And there's a percent and there's flag characters and there's values and whatever. And then it comes down here and says, I like modifiers. Then I have conversion specifiers and tells you everything you want to know about producing output using pronouns. It's all there, the entire documentation. Now print out is actually really complicated, so I don't want to go through this right now. You're going to do pretty simple stuff like percent D and percent F, right in this course. Okay. And I'm going to close them and read. All right. Now, if there are any questions, please ask questions. Yes. So for the studio. Yeah, you said it's for input and output. So does it handle input and output? So is that only for the input and output to the to the terminal? No, that's a really good question. That's a really good question. No, it's not. It's for all input and output from files devices like anything we want to read or write from. In this course, you're going to do essentially all of your input and output to the terminal because we don't I mean, we have to decide what we teach you. I would rather you learn how to use the C programing language and how to use some of these other facilities we're going to talk about then that we spend a bunch of time talking about like file access permissions and, you know, all kinds of other peripheral stuff. So we're going to use it for the terminal. But if you want to do any input and output in C, you're going to use a studio. Right. Studio is your go to. We will talk a little bit about that at the end of the course. If you wanted to know if you were like what is in studio? I'm going to try this. I hope it's going to work. You can open your main farm in the wrong terminal. You can open your man and you can say studio. And look, there's an audio entry. That's one of my options. Standard input and output library functions. And there will be a huge list of all the functions in a studio. So for example, I can find my print F here. Microphone, my cursor over it. I can hit enter and it'll take me to the print off my [INAUDIBLE]. Right. That. Answer your question. Yeah. All right. What else? Other questions. This is a really good question. Okay, so Pranav is not interesting. If I just declare a variable and tell you to print this thing that I just told you right? When Pranav is interesting is when I don't know what I'm going to print. So what I want to do here first my on the on monitor again I have wanted for years, so I use what's called focus follows mouse right when I move my mouse cursor over a window, when I type, the typing goes to that window. I don't have to click on it. All right, you should all do this. It's way better than light. Click to focus. What I really want is focus follows eyes. If I'm looking at a window and I type, why does the keyboard not go to that window? Right? This is closely related to the problem where you have two keyboards, like I'm two keyboards here and you're typing on the wrong keyboard because there's two computers. Like you have your laptop sitting on your desk and you got your desktop keyboard right there and you're typing on your desktop keyboard and looking at your laptop screen and you're like, Why is this computer such a piece of garbage? Right? Anyway, focus follows eyes. I'm counting on you guys as the next generation to give me focus follows eyes. All right, now I'm on the right monitor. We're going to. We're going to use. Print after print some things that we don't know. You know, at the very beginning of class, you asked what is our key and what is our movie and what are all these characters right on Main because I just typed them in every time and I told you last time, we're not gonna worry about it right now. We're going to worry about them. Right now. Every C program receives two arguments our C, which is the number of arguments that were given to your program, not the main function. It has to arguments to your program on the command line and arg v, which is a vector or as we call it in most modern programing languages, an array of those arguments. Right? So when I do over here in the shell, I said GTC dash oh print, print, dot c, GTC is a program and it needs to know that I said dash oh, print, print, dot c. There has to be a way to communicate that to GTC that that is how I invoked it at the shell. These command, these are command line arguments I gave arguments to GCC. GCC is the name of the program Dash. Oh, print print does C are its arguments. Those arguments come in in this arg v vector. Now the type of this vector care star r v square brackets is a little bit strange. The type of this vector is a an array of pointers to characters, and we haven't talked about pointers yet. I don't want to talk about pointers today, but just be aware it is an array of pointers to character. So we read it from right to left. The square bracket says it's an array, it's name is R, V wants an array of pointers. That's the star to characters. That's the care, right? So care star V Unfortunately, in the C programing language, we don't actually read from right to left. We read in a spiral. So when the types become more complicated, it becomes more difficult to figure out exactly what the types are. But it's not going to be a problem in this course. We're going to read this from right to left is an array of pointers to characters. We'll talk about what pointers to characters are later. But what I want you to know for right now is that in the C programing language, there is no string type. So you're used to programing language where strings are a native type in the language. There is no string type in the C programing language. In the C programing language, A string is an array of characters where the last character has the numeric value of zero. We'll talk more about that later. But for now it's an array of characters with the last character has the numeric value of zero. So I have been given a series of arguments that are C strings, and those C strings are all arrays of characters. The numeric value is zero. Any function in the C standard library that expects a string argument will accept an array of characters with the last character. Zero. Because there is no native string type. I can't say string s in C, I say Care Star s or care s square brackets. We'll talk more about that. But for now I've been given this array. This array includes the command line arguments that were given to my program. So what I want to do right now is I want to print those command line arguments. I'm going to use a construction called a for loop you've all seen for loops, but in C, again, for loops are a little bit different from what you may have seen before in that we have no iterator and c there's no such thing as an iterator in C, So if I'm in Python or I'm in Java, I'm going to do something like this, right? The syntax is a little bit different between Python and Java. I say for every arg in the array arg v I want to print the arguments. I can't do that in C there are no iterator and c so instead I have to operate over the indexes. The indices of the array are V. How many elements are in arg? V. R. C. R. C is the number of elements in the RV array. Right? I have to know this. There are no integrators and. Furthermore, arrays don't have a size that I can query at the time that my program runs. I just have to know how many elements are in this array. This can come up over and over and see how big is something. The answer is usually you just have to know, right? In this case, I know because I'm told it's Argosy. So if I want to look at every argument in the array r, V, and C, the canonical way to do this is this. I declare an integer. I start a zero. I is less than RC because RC is the number of elements in the array. The array indices start at zero. So if RC is three, there are three elements and they are zero one and two. Right. And then cannot idiomatically. What I normally do is this I plus plus I plus plus says take the value, I add one to it and store it back to I increment I. So this is how I iterate over an array in C. And then I'm going to use an F. I don't know why the network is so bad today. I mean, it was on fire with fire alarm us. So I'm going to say this ROV sub D equals and I put it in single quotes, strings and C use double quotes. I put it in single quotes because if I want to use double quotes, I would have to do this and I have to escape my double quotes. And I want to talk about that right now. Right. So this makes sense. So I want to present the string RV RV of some value that I give you at the time my program runs equals to some value that I give you at the time my program runs, the values that I'm passing it and or the index of the array that I want to look at and the value stored at that index. Right. So if I, if I compile and run this. It's going to show me the list of arguments that are given to my program. It's going to print them out as not a right now. There's going to be a surprising thing in this array, and that is that RV, because subzero is not necessarily what we expect. Oh, there was another surprising thing for me here, but it shouldn't have been. In the sea. And this is true of most programing languages. Actually, ROV Sub-zero is not the first argument that you pass in the program. It's the name of the program. So I ran. Dot slash args. This is a list of arguments and I received an RV sub zero dot slash arbs dot size args is the name of the program that I run and then the remainder of arg v I receive the list of arguments that I gave it. So an RV sub one through RV sub six I received. This is a list of arguments and the shell, the command line environment. The interpreter took those arguments and broke them up on whitespace. So where I had a space that said, Oh, that's the end of one argument and it's going to be the beginning of a new argument. And it ended at the end when I pressed enter. So that makes sense. Yes, there's a file name. There's a file name called ARGs. Because when I said GDC dashboards, I caused it to create a file named ARBs. That is the program that I just run. Ran. Right. It's right here. Four questions. Yes. Why did you do? I think that's why. Because those are decimal numbers. I said this before, I say it many times, it's going to confuse many of you many times over the semester. This is okay. Decimal does not mean that it has a decimal point. In decimal means that it is base ten, right? So when I get to nine, the next number is one zero. That's ten. There are other bases that we will use. Binary. For example, binary is based two. When I get to one, the next number is one zero. Looks like ten, but it's not right. Octal base eight We won't use base eight, but it's used a lot in computers. Well, used to be used a lot in computer science hexadecimal. We will use a time based 16 will go one through nine, then A, B, C, D, s, then ten. Right decimal cells that I want base ten different from it has a decimal point in it that's floating point. Yes. Percent says, I want to print a string. And each of those our values of our V are strings. So let's look at a string in C. As I said, a string is an array of characters ending with a character with the value zero, the numeric value zero. What does it mean for a character of a numeric value? Zero. Remember last time we looked at put care and we said that we can put care a series of characters and we could use 105 and it was like a capital H or something. And seven. No, that's lowercase. One or five is lowercase. 72, I think was Capital H. Right. 105 was, I don't know, whatever like. I, I think, I think we did height so in C in the computer everything's just a number. Characters are numbers. We take the magic value zero and we say zero means there are no more characters to be found here. So instead of doing what I just did, I could do a for loop. And I can say start with I equals zero, right? The first part of the four loop, I need to say, and I need to declare it the first part of the for loop is going to be initialize her. I want to initialize this for loop starting with I equals zero. The second part is the condition. As long as the condition is true, the body between the curly brackets will run so the condition doesn't have to be based on the value of r. It can be anything that could be true or could be false. So as long as arg v sub i no argument will take RV subzero survival. Right. So RV is an array of arrays. It's an array of strings In C. I don't want to do this. This is going to be confusing. I can see the question marks in your eyes. All right. So our V0 is a string, and C, a string and C is an array of characters where the last character is a zero. So I say while arg v zero sub i the i character of our movie zero is not zero run this loop, but I don't say zero zero is fine. I said arg zero zero is fine, but zero is not a good thing to write here. Technically speaking, I want to run this loop until this value is the numeric value. Zero. But as a programmer, why is that zero? Why did I put zero there? It's not necessarily immediately obvious looking at this line of code. So as a good C program or what I would say instead. Is this? Remember we said the single text in C represented a character and we showed that it was equivalent to the numeric value, the character zero, the Terminator character, which we call null capital in Capital U. Capital L, three letters null is backslash, zero, backslash zero is the character having the numeric value zero. By writing this loop saying while args v arg zero is not equal to tic backslash zero tick. I am telling not the compiler. The compiler doesn't care. Not the computer. The computer doesn't care. The next human programmer who reads my program. I am iterating over a string and I am iterating over iterating over this string until I get to the null terminator, which is what we call that zero at the end of the string. So the next human programmer, without looking at anything else in this program, without looking at where our zero came from, knows our zero is a string and I am looking at every character in this string. If I said while arg zero sum, I is not equal to the numbers zero. The compiler would be happy, the computer would be happy. The human programmer would have to look around in this program and figure out what our zero is and why I'm running until it equals zero by using tick backslash zero tick. I am communicating that it is a string and I am iterating until I get to the end of the string. This is what is called an idiom. This is a programing idiom. We will talk quite a bit about idioms in this class. Idioms are a way of saying something that is natural to a fluent speaker of a language and communicates some sort of information. Right? So for example, if I say I give up. Pick this apart grammatically, I give here up. It's nonsense. Nonsense. But every single English speaker in this room knows when I say I give up that I was trying to do something and I'm deciding not to do that thing anymore. Right? That's an idiom. Programing has idioms. There's good news about programing, idioms. They're never dramatic nonsense, like I give up, right? But they are a particular way of expressing a particular thing that you want to program such that the next programmer understands a little bit more about the context in which you wrote it. In this case, that idiom says, I am iterating over the characters in a string. Okay, I was a lot of words. I only have a limited number of words today, and then I'm going to print fr0 sub four D equals tic, and I'm to use percent C, which means I want to print a character. I is the element of the array and r zero sub. I is the character. Oh, I've made a mistake. That's easier to do with Pranav. And the characters that are Ray are Dot and then slash and then a etc., etc. Right. And the end of that string is that zero character that we looked at. So it makes sense. Are there any questions? Okay. So what have we talked about today? We've talked about formatted output using printouts. We have talked about the structure of arrays. And see, they started zero. This is not a strange concept, any of it. Right. This started zero. We talked about the fact that C doesn't have iterator. We talked about the three clause for loop. It has an initialize or a condition and an increment. Operator. Right. That's the three clauses with the semicolons in between. We talked about the structure of C strings. They are an array of characters in which the value of the last character is zero. We talked about the arguments to a program How do I access the individual arguments to a program? Where do I get them? Where do they come from? And we looked at printing out some arguments and some strings. On Wednesday, we will do one final exercise from this lecture. We're going to write a single function together. Think about the things that we did play with this stuff. Look at this stuff, and then we're going to start a new lecture. Remember that zero released today? There will be a post on Piazza that is available to you right now and you'll be learns. It will be due next Friday. Thank you all very much. I hope I don't sound so gross on Wednesday, and I'll see you Wednesday. Remember that there's no school on Monday. Not that you'd forget. There's no school up. 