Good morning, everybody. Whoa, that's loud. How's everybody doing this morning? I'll wait for you guys to answer. That's how I am. All right. Is that Mike? Volume is super loud, right? That better? That seems better, right? I don't really need the microphone. It's for the recording. Did anybody listen to the recording? Did anybody see the recording? Yesterday? Was the audio okay? It's okay. Yeah. Okay. Please let me know. It's frequent that they mess with the mixers in here and the audio winds up being distorted. If that happens, just let me know. If I put a ticket in, they'll fix it immediately. Right. And we don't want anybody to have to listen to distorted audio. Okay. So we have some a little bit of stuff to cover today, like introductory stuff here at the beginning of this lecture and then for today and for the next week or week and a half, we're going to spend most of our time in the editor and actually write some C code, right? So you can see it being done. And that has several purposes. One is, as we discussed last time, you all are new to this. You're new to C programing, you're new. Most of you are new to the Unix environment that we're using. You've done plenty of programing before and 115 116 but of a more limited scope than what we're going to be doing here. So we're going to talk a little bit about mechanics and how we why we do the things we do and how we do them to get you used to, you know, and obviously we're not going to write new large programs in class. We don't have time, but we'll talk about the ways that I'm working on things and why we're doing it the way we're doing it, so that you're prepared to do them when you do your own projects and such. I really love that people are walking in late, so I'm going to go ahead and start the top hat right now. So here's our first question. Which of the following resources are permitted for use in CSC to 20? I know nine and feel super early when you're like 19 or 20 or whatever, but like class starts at nine. I might be a little grumpy today because I was here like on campus working until like 11:30 p.m. So. Is it done? Did it finish the. That was fast. 37, 30 seconds. Wow. So anybody who's walking in right now, if this was a regular day, you would have already missed your attendance for the day. And that's one of your 30 days, right? Yeah. So you said this week doesn't throw this week doesn't count. Yeah, I don't get it. Was there supposed to be 45 seconds? This one's a little short. Yeah. You should log in to top out when you come into class. I would love to know. And it still didn't happen. Yeah. All right. We'll take care of that if it happens. But I'm more worried about the people who, like, haven't bothered to show up yet. Right. It's disrespectful to your classmates, right, to walk in in the middle of class. I love it when people walk in this door over here, like walk all the way across the classroom and go up to the back or whatever. It's like you guys are trying to pay attention, right? I told you I'm grumpy this morning. I'm going to be a lot. So I'm not sure if everybody understood the question exactly, But I can see six people, three people for people to people, one person and one person who are probably going to fail this course. Right. You cannot use your classmates online tutoring sites, online question, answer sites, chat, JPT, someone who took this course in the past semester, or a fee based programing to order service to do your work in this class, you will fail with an F and you will take it again in a future semester, right? Because you have to have it. Fun fact, you have to have it and you really have to have it here. I'm aware of two other universities in the state of New York that offer an equivalent course, and they're routinely so full that their students come here to take hours because they can't get a seat in their own course. Right. So don't do those things. You may use the required textbook K and R, It's a great resource. You should use it. You can copy code directly. All of K and R, put it in your assignment and wrote. I got this from chapter five of K and R and I will grade it and I will give you all the credit. Right. Course staff, please use your core staff. We love it. It's what we're here for. And you may use the optional textbook and any other readings that I give you in this course. If I say you should go read this thing on the Internet and it has code in it and you want to use it, or I say you should go. You read this thing on the Internet and you take the exam and you're like, I read this on the Internet. This is exactly the right answer. You write it down, you get all the points. If I told you, you could use it. Any questions? Awesome. So we really only did that this early because I'm grumpy this morning. It's fine. You'll get used to it. So we're going to go through a couple of slides and then we're going to open up the editor and we're going to do some programing. So first of all, there isn't a sign reading. You have all of already had an assigned reading as the introduction in chapter one of current. Again enriching the C programing language. You should all have already read it right. It was assigned on Monday. You should have read it by today. I understand that maybe you don't have the textbook or whatever. It's the first week of classes this happens, but like in on the normal schedule, you should have read it by today. We're going to talk about it today. We're going to expect you to know it today. I hope everybody has tested associating a new emotion, starting extra, etc. If it's not working because you had trouble, fine. Right. We will help you through that. There will be to office hours starting today. There's a calendar on Piazza. If you go to Piazza, there will be office hours being offered every day of the week, Monday through Friday for the rest of the semester. Starting today, there's something like 50 something hours a week of office hours. Right. The Tas are available to you. Go in and say, Hey, my my expert is not working. Can you help me with this? Right. We will get you going, but you should be testing it now. None of you have lab yet this morning because Lab is going the first lab is going on right now. You do have lab this week. If you can test it before lab. That's fantastic. Have you compiled and run? Hello world. It's in chapter one of K and R. It says Hey, type this in, compile it and run it. You should do that, right? You should log into Oman, you should compile it and you should run it. We're going to go through it right now. But you should do it at home, too. We know that many of you are new to the command prompt and that there's a lot of things we're going to ask you to do. They're going to feel strange, unfamiliar, and maybe a little bit uncomfortable. That's fine. We'll get you through it. Just follow the instructions and it will be fine, right? If we ask you to go to the terminal and type of thing, go to the terminal, type that thing, read the output if there was a problem, See if you can figure out what you did wrong. If you can't figure it out, ask, we will help you. Please check up Piazza frequently and read everything for all of the assignments and all of the labs. Read the handout, read the given code. If there's a read me, read the read me. There's great information in all of those things. All right. That's administrative garbage. So things you already know that are going to carry over beautifully into the C programing language and expression is a part of a program that has a value. If you type some expression into your program, it will yield a value that you can pass to a function or assigned to a variable or something like that. We have a whole set of examples of expressions up here, both simple expressions which are just straight up values and compound expressions which do some computation and produce a value. Keep in mind that some of these expressions up here produce side effects. So plus plus is an operator and see that you may not have seen before. It takes a variable. It adds one to that variable, changes the value of the variable and then returns the old value of the variable. Right? So if I use the if x is three and I use X plus plus in my program, wherever I use X plus plus, it resolves to the value three. But the next time I read X, it now has the value for because as part of that expression, the value of x was changed in the C programing language. Y equals three is an expression. It returns a value. So if I know what value, it returns three and somebody said three, returns three. So you can say x equals y equals three, and that will set Y to three, return three and assign it to X. Should you do that in your programs? You should not, you should say x equals three semicolon, y equals three semicolon, but you will absolutely read code that does that and you should know what it does. In particular current. Again, in Ritchie, the C programing language is printed on a relatively modest sized page. They do a lot of things to get their code into fewer lines of code, so it fits on the screen. You'll see them doing things like Y equals X plus plus right or x equals y equals three that you wouldn't do in your code because it just confuses the issue. They've done it so that it fits on the page, right? So just keep this in mind. Other things you already know and you will see again in C++, there are statements in C++, we're not doing C++. C++ is terrible. Don't do C++. A statement is a part of a program that has a side effect but does not have a value or you are not using the value. So. Y equals three was an expression. We can assign something to Y equals three, but y equals three. Semicolon as a statement doesn't have a value. Right? It assigned three to y. But what happened to that three After that? Nothing. Right? It was discarded. If we call many functions, the puts function, for example, the puts function is not returning a value that's useful to us. So we say puts a that put the Princess Green character or a string to the screen semicolon. We don't use the value. There are also statements that are compound that get very, very complex. So we can say if X is less than three, do something that doesn't return anything. This is different from some languages may be used before in Python. I think you can return a value from an F statement, right? You can say x equals if something. Now you say x equals something if right in python you can't. Nancy. Right. It's a statement. It doesn't even return a value. Whereas we could say x equals y equals three. We can't say x equals x if x is less than three, seven else something else, right? We just can't even say it. The compiler won't let us do it. The values as well can be more or less complicated in the C programing language. We don't have objects. All right. You may be familiar with objects from Java, familiar with objects from Python. We don't have objects. We do have what are called structures, which is a collection of values gathered together. We'll talk more about them later. And we do have arrays, right? So arrays and structures are values. There's some thing that we can use as data in our computation, as well as the standard values that you're used to. A string, a number, a floating point number, right. 3.7 and three are both values. They're values of different types. We'll talk more about that later. The character G is a value right here. It's a C, Every value and variable in the C programing language is associated with a type. Unlike Python and like Java, you have to care about those types because if you try to assign, if you say x equals three and later you say x equals hello world, the compiler is going to say you can't equal Hello world, It's a number, right? Hello. World is not a number. This is should be familiar to you from Java. Right. All right. I can talk more about these things. But instead of that. Yeah. Instead of that, I would like to write some programs. So we're going to go ahead and write some programs. Now, all of you have instructions in at eight for how to get connected to our timesharing system. I am going to connect to our timesharing system right now so you can see how that works. I'm going to do it by typing a command. You can also do it through the gooey, right? You can start zero and then click some various things and it didn't work out. It's up at the top of the screen. You don't have to be able to read it, but I'm going to run extra start dash, dash, start. And I'm going to go ahead and start. That's our terminal and on stage, colon slash, slash email. I'm just going to say I'm on that's going to work on my computer. On your computer, you might need I-Man, dot, CSC, dot, Buffalo dot PD expert is going to come up. It's going to tell you it's connecting for a while. And then at some point the terminal is going to show up. Now, for many of you, this is the first time that you have used. A computer that's not yours in a direct fashion. Right. You've used websites and stuff, and like, intellectually, you know, when you use your web browser to go to Google.com, Google.com is not inside your computer. Right. It's somewhere else. This terminal is not running inside your computer. Right. This window is a terminal. We call this window right here. A terminal. Right. A terminal as in an end point. Right. So the terminal of the line and a railroad is the last station on the line. Right. The terminal is the end point. It is the end of where the computer stops and you begin. Right. It is the terminal of the computer. This is a terminology from when there was a computer in a room somewhere else, and there was a cable under the raised floor. And it came into your office and it came up and you had a screen and a keyboard in your office and it was hooked to the computer that was like downstairs or whatever, upstairs or somewhere else in the building. Right. We still use the same term. This terminal that's on my screen right now, the black window that I'm about to type into is not on my computer. It looks like it's on my computer. It's showing on my computer, but it's not. It's on a computer in a server room in Davis Hall. That's called Iman. Right. The terminal is on Iman, the prompt in that terminal that says E Blanton, Iman Tilde. The dollar sign is running on that computer in Davis Hall. So what that means is this terminal doesn't have any of the files that are on my computer. It doesn't have any of the configuration that I've set up on my computer because all of those things are on my computer and this terminal is running on demand. Right. For many of you, this is the first time you've experienced this. Some of you were like, okay, that's fine. Whatever. Why do I care? Some of you, at some point during the semester, I'll be like, Oh, that's on, I'm on. And you'll understand, like where this divide is and why this is going to matter to you. Some of you will never matter to you. You won't care, and it won't be a big problem. It depends on how you use the computer, the problems you run into, things like that. But be aware that this terminal is not right on your computer. This prompt that's there that I'm about to type commands into is not on my computer, it's on a computer in Davis Hall. So at this prompt, I can do many unique things. There is a post, I think it's at nine that has tons of information about how to do Unix things. You're going to need to learn a minimal quantity of UNIX things in order to get through this class. I highly recommend that you take advantage of your core staff of the things that we provide you in this course, etc. to learn more of those Unix things then you absolutely have to learn for this course. And the reason is you will never get away from UNIX for your entire career. It is dangerous to make predictions in tech. You're always wrong, but I'm pretty sure I can tell you you're never going to get away from UNIX for your entire career. It turned 50 years old four years ago and we're still using it, right? Some things just don't go away. Sometimes you get things right and they just don't go away. Right now. You may not run Unix on your computer. You may have Windows, right? It's not Unix. If you have Mac OS, guess what? It's Unix. You don't have to use it as Unix most of the time. But when you pull up that terminal, it's just like this, right? It'll work just exactly like this. But wherever you're working, whatever you're working on, you're going to use Unix machines, all the servers that run the Internet, running Unix, right? When you have a virtual private server somewhere, it's running Unix. You spin up a Kubernetes Docker instance, somewhere, it's running Unix, etc., etc. Linux in many cases, but Linux is an implementation of the UNIX APIs. Yes, I was going to say, what's the difference between Unix? What's the difference between UNIX and Linux? It's like Kleenex. You go to the store and you sound by some Kleenex and you go pick up a box of puffs off the shelf and you bring them home and you bought some Kleenex. This puffs are not Kleenex as Kleenex is a brand. Unix is a brand. Linux is an implementation of all of the application interfaces that make up Unix That is not technically Unix makes sense. Like you go to Starbucks, you say I'm to get some coffee. This isn't coffee, this is garbage, but it's kind of brown. And it was made from being. So we call it coffee. It makes sense, except in the case of Linux, it's actually not bad. Like Starbucks. All right. Okay, So what can I do in this terminal? There's a command ls I can list the files that are in a particular directory I run. LS These are the files that are in my home directory, my personal directory on Iman. I can change that directory to the CAC to 20 directory. I can list the files that are there. I see some files. You'll see these files that have this little tilde at the end. C l says hello, Dot c tilde. That is a backup file. I edited Hello, dot C, and when I save it, it saves the old copy as Hello, dot C, tilde. And the new copy is Hello, dot C. That way if I made a mistake, I can go back and I can get the the the last version that I saved back. This isn't so useful to us because we're going to be using version control. But when you're editing files under which are not under version control, this can save your bacon. Like oops, I accidentally deleted half my file over. I've still got it. It's right here. Right. Okay. I don't want to talk a lot about the terminal, but I do want to say I did want to say a few things. And I do want to remind you, we know that you are unfamiliar with this and that it is uncomfortable. It's fine. We'll get you through it. But it is something you're going to have to spend a little bit of time on there. Any questions? How many of you have successfully been able to connect to him on most of you? How many of you have tried to connect to him on? And it went poorly. A fair number of you. Okay. We will help you in lab this week with that. And there are also, again, our office hours all week. Please get into office hours and ask your question, sir. Yeah. So the first thing I say, if you are comfortable doing everything in the terminal, you may use us to search. Most students find that they would like to have some of the features that running the gooey things gives them, like better fonts and more colors and whatever things. There are also some tools that we're going to suggest that you use later in the semester that are actually just goofy tools like MELD and some other things that are not available at the prompt. But day to day, if you want to use, as I say, to use those as. Right. I don't care. I use this as sage a lot. Right When I'm working on I'm on when I need to do serious program editing, I connect with a gooey applicator. Well, it's a long story, what I actually do. But like from 10,000 feet, I connect with the gooey application, and I use a gooey editor because it gives me like, more flexibility in my display. Okay, So another thing we're going to ask you to do is run an editor that's called Emacs. You don't have to use Emacs. I strongly recommend that you use Emacs, whatever you're using. Listen, you're 20 years old or whatever, right? Maybe you're 21, maybe you're 19. Maybe you're a different age. You think you know what a good editor is? You're like, I'm using Vsco vsco to some hot [INAUDIBLE] because of web browser people. It's a web browser. Please try Emacs. You will discover that there's actually a world out there that's better than the world you already know. It has a learning curve. So in the beginning it's scary, but once you learn it, you'll be like, Why did I ever want to use these other things? I used them because everybody said they were cool, not because they were actually good. And then you'll, you know, enjoy your programing more. So try it. You don't have to like it when you're done with 220. You can give it up, but I recommend that you try. All right, here's Emacs. I'm starting Emacs. When you start your Emacs, it's not going to look like this When you start your Emacs the first time it's white and super ugly. There is a script in my home directory. There's instruction that at eight that will make it look not exactly like this. My fonts are bigger, my colors are a little bit different, etc. etc. Improve contrast right on the large display and make it so that in the compressed Panopto recording you have some prayer of actually reading what I typed, but it'll look similar, right? Similar to what this is in this window. There's a number of things that you should be aware of because this terminology is going to come up. There's help files that will tell you these things right there at the top of the screen, the entire giant empty black area we call a buffer. Right now, it's holding it's it's the quote unquote scratch buffer, which is just non saved. You can type something there. You can use it to cut and paste things. You know, whatever. We don't care about scratch buffer right now. That's where you edit things. The line across here is called the mode line, the blue line that says scratch all four comma, zero lisp interaction. Yes, whatever. And at the bottom where it says for information about going to Emacs that is called the mini buffer. The mini buffer is where you type commands for Emacs so that it knows what it is you want to do. Emacs is not just an editor. It is a programing language and a complete programing environment, virtual machine, etc., all running on top of the unique system. So we can do things like open files and shells inside our Emacs. So if I have mine, bound to a key. So I to open up a shell, I hope you see up at the top it says I hit all s m is alt and it ran ilb shell other window and that created this shell over here on the side. This is like the command prompt that you would run like this one that we had over here. Right. It's like that command prompt. I can run commands. They will do the things that I would expect commands to do. It is different in some ways. In particular, when you get to programing assignment one, we're going to tell you there things you can't do in this shell that you can do with the regular command prompt, but it's essentially a command prompt. It's convenient to have it in my editor. Note that at the top right hand side of the screen, when I push a key, it tells you what key it pushed and it tells you what Emacs function that key caused to be called. I hit the key. It called the function self insert command and in a appeared on the screen. Right. If I want to go to the other side of the screen, I can. It control x? Oh, it will tell you I ran control xo other window and it took my key, my precursor to the other side of the screen. Do you need to know these key bindings? You do not. In your iMacs, you'll have something like this. Menu. Yeah. Menu. Bar mode one. Yeah. Look at this. I've got a menu up here I can do file, open file, etc. I'm not going to do those things. I'm going to use the key bindings. Do you have to learn the key bindings? No. Should you learn the key bindings? Like eventually? Yes. Write it. Speeds things up. Do you need to learn them in the first week of CC 220? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. In fact, I like the menu bar so much that I'm gonna make it go away. All right. Okay. What else? All right, that's it. All right, That's. That's fine. We talked a lot about Emacs. So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to use the shell to make a not that directory to make a directory, uh, for today's lecture. And I'm going to open a file in this directory called Hello, dot C. Now, note that what I'm doing, I basically did file open it, said, What file do you want to open? I said, Hello, dot C. Hello? He doesn't exist. In Unix you normally like in Windows or on Mac OS or whatever. If you want a new document, you open some program and you do file new and it creates a new document and then you edit your stuff and then you do files save and you save that document in Unix. That's normally not how things work. You open a file that doesn't exist and then you just save it, right? So many people say, I don't know how to create a file, how do I create a file in Emacs? There's already like four questions on Picasa. How do I create a file? Right. You just open a file that doesn't exist. So I say open. Hello, dot C. Hey, there's. Hello, dot C, I can edit. Hello, dot C, I can create data inside this. Hello dot C, It doesn't exist at some point. I do control X control s and see how it says down at the bottom. That's the save command, right? That's like file save it says root, blah blah blah. Hello dot C. So now if I go over here and I list that directory, look there's a Hello Daisy, just open a file that doesn't exist and save it when you're done. All right, We're going to go through the Hello world exercise. Hello, world Fun fact. Brian Koenig in who wrote the C programing language. Right. He wrote the book The C, Well, Brian Kerning and Dennis Ritchie. Dennis Ritchie invented the C programing language. Unfortunately, he passed away, I think 2010 or something like that a number of years ago. He's no longer with us. Brian Curran again wrote the first documentation for the C programing language and Ropes Dennis Ritchie into helping write and write this book. Karen again, and Ritchie the C programing language. Brian Koenig is still kicking around. He's teaching at Princeton now, and he's worth like go to YouTube and search for like interview with Brian Okanagan and stuff like that. He's a really fascinating guy, excellent educator, excellent speaker, has a lot of interesting things to say and also happens to be like the nicest guy. Just the nicest guy. He's a he's a great guy. Anyway, Brian Koenig and wrote a book. I don't remember exactly which book it was. I think it was a tutorial for the B programing language would be came before C makes sense, right? B came before C, And in that book he had an example where he showed people that they could trivially write a program and it would say Hello World. That was the first usage of the first program you write in a program and a programing language being Hello World. And now, like every tutorial in the world, when you go to write a learn a programing language, they're like, first thing we're going to do is we're going to write a program that says Hello World, right? Fun fact, I thought it was fun. So in C, the C compiler does not know about any of the facilities that are available to us. Until we tell it, it does not know about the functions that print to the screen. It does not know about the functions that let us open files, make network connections, things like that. We have to tell it about those things because of the way the C language works. In order to do that, we will pound include a header file, in this case STD IO, dot HS, standard input and output dot h. These names are somewhat cryptic. You just need to know that I'm about to print a string to the screen in order to do that. The function that I need to do that is in Studio dot H. Now, fortunately, there's documentation that tells you where these functions are because it can be difficult to remember. There's unlisted dot h, there's star lib, dot h, there's FC, Intel dot H, there's a zillion of these things and you're like, I need to allocate memory. Where was that function defined? And it's either in you and I STD or it's in STD lib. I can't remember, you know, whatever. You can look it up. We'll talk about how to do that later. It's called man pages. But in this particular case, I need to tell the C compiler I want to print something to the output of my program. So I'm going to pound include SDI. Okay. H What stockbroker H is is a file somewhere on the computer that includes declarations of functions that exist. One of those functions is puts put string, which is what I'm going to use to bring to the screen. And it doesn't include puts, it doesn't tell the compiler how to puts it just as somewhere on this computer you can find the function puts and when you call it, you give it a string as an argument and it returns nothing that I care about, right? So it declares that the function puts exists. Once I've done that, I can use the puts function unlike Python in like Java. I cannot call a function without having a function. A C program starts at a function called main may and traditionally takes. Three arguments. There's a pill crow after that. It's not true. But we're going to say it takes three arguments. There are two arguments. I'm sorry, Two arguments. It actually takes three. Nobody knows The third one. Nobody uses the third one. But it does exist. It's EMV is what it's called. NVP is what it's traditionally called. We're not going to use it. RG and RV, we'll talk about RC and RV more later today. We're going to four Hello World. We're going to say, Hey, I have a function. It's called Main. It returns an integer. It has two arguments RC and RV, and we're not going to use RC or RV, but be aware that they do exist. We'll talk more about them later. And then the minimally. Well, actually, let me back up a little bit. The minimally correct C program. Is this right here? I declare a function called Main. It takes two arguments. It returns zero. It returns zero. Because zero is our way of telling the computer. My program ran. Everything worked fine, and I'm done. If we returned, not zero, what we would be saying is my program ran something, didn't work. Fine. And I'm done. Right. It's like returning an error to the outer program. Like to to tell the. The program that ran your program, there was some sort of problem, right? Zero indicates that everything was fine. So if I do this, I can then come over here, and then in an hour, it tells you to use the command key. We're going to use the command. CC. CC will work. CC is fine. We're going to use the command C. Hello Daisy. DCC stands for new compiler collection by default when compiling a file that ends in C, the new compiler collection is going to compile it as a C file. It is going to take this stuff that I wrote on the left and it's going to make a program that we can run. I should have wondered why it was not happy. This is actually correct. Okay. Should be care star. I compiled the program. Note that I ran. Hello, Dotty. What happened? It happened. But what visibly it did, it compiled it. What visibly happened in my terminal? Nothing. Did it work? It worked in Unix. When things work, they usually do nothing. When they don't work, they tell you like it did. They're right. Oh, there's an error, right? When they don't work, they say something. When they do work, they just say nothing. They're done. They did their job. What do you want to hear from them? Right. Huh? Basically, just. I can't hear you. It basically it checked something like checking. Well, yes. If it compiled, then it believes it was a correct C program. Everything's fine. It compiled it and it told you nothing about it because what do you want to know? It worked, right? You want to hear anything? You got work to do, right? You want to read output. You guys don't want read anything, right? You don't want read output from the compiler. Come on. So now that it did that, if I list this directory, you'll see that there's a file in this directory called 8.8. out is what the C compiler created when it compiled my program. I can run a dot out with dot slash. The dot slash is required. It's not in K.R., but it's required on modern systems. We'll talk more about that some other time it got out. What am I programed to? Just run out? I ran it all out. What did it do? It returns zero, right? It didn't print zero. It returns zero. Can I tell the return zero? I cannot tell it. It returns zero. But it did. I promise it returns zero. Okay, So we compiled and ran our first C program. I'm going to now do a top hat question because I'm supposed to do this. What does LB include? STD What age do? It causes the preprocessor to add declarations from studio, not age before the code is passed on to the compiler. It causes the. Oh, we didn't talk about the preprocessor in the compiler. Big hint, it's the preprocessor one. It caused the preprocessor to add definition for a studio for the compile the code. Add definitions from the old adage or it calls the compiler to do these things. It calls the preprocessor. Do these things. I didn't say that out loud. Which one does it do? Is it declarations or is it definitions? Think about what the difference is. By the way, this is our second top, our question of the day. If you came in and you didn't do a top out question already on a normal class day, you've missed your attendance. You should have been here, right? This week, of course, we have a little bit more leeway because not everybody may have top hat, may not have it ready. Why did we do it so early today? Because I'm grumpy. I could be grumpy on any given day. Your Tas aren't here today. They'll tell you I'm grumpy on a lot of given days. But like the good kind of grumpy. All right. We're about split. Half and half did add declarations or definitions. Some people, I told you it wasn't the compiler one and you answered it was the compiler one. I told you it wasn't the compiler one. Because it's not. It's the preprocessor. Remember that I said that when we include standard order, we're telling we're declaring to the compiler that the functions in that header file exist, but we're not telling it what they are, what they are. The definitions of those functions is somewhere else, right? We're just telling it what they that they exist. So what I'm supposed to do is now run again a second iteration of this quiz. It's only going to run for 30 seconds. And you'll answer again. You'll discuss amongst yourselves for a moment what you think the answers might be, and we'll run it again. I just discussed it for a moment with you, so I would then run it again. You would have 30 seconds to answer again. And the hope is that this time everybody gets it right, because we just talked about the right answer. Right. The next one. I'll follow the script and I'll let you discuss amongst yourselves. This is. This always scares me. Like I feel butterflies right now before I click responses here. It's pretty good, actually. Preprocessor adds declarations to definitions or somewhere else, and we'll see how definitions work later. We're going to redefine the function, right? We just define the function main. The preprocessor file that was included steady code orange told the compiler these input and output functions exist. It did not tell them how they work. It just said they exist. Correct answers. All right. Sounds good. Actually. Let me get that off the screen entirely. All right. So now let's use studio dotage. It's very confusing to me. My computer thinks that monitor is on the right, but it's actually on the left. I need to fix that. Last classroom I taught in the monitor was on the right, not the left. So we're actually going to. Actually, we're going to go back to No. Okay. There. We're going to get back our include C, D, out at H, and we are going to use a function from SDO that h that function is called puts, put a string to the screen and we are going to you see at the bottom, it gives me a little bit of documentation on what puts is this is in the default setup. If you run my setup you'll get this sort of stuff I'm going to puts as is traditional Hello world. Now if I run my program again, what's going to happen? It's going to turn zero. Why? Because it because I didn't compile it. Unlike Python where you just edit the program, you run it again and it does what you wanted and see if you don't compile it, it's going to do whatever it did the last time you compiled it. Many of you this semester will come to the Tas and be like My I fix this bug and it's still crashing. I don't know why. And we're going to say, Did you run make? And here is I. Yes, I ran make and we're going to say why don't you run make again and you're going to run make it's compile We're going to say run it again. You're going to run it. It's going to work. Right? I would be I could be condescending about that. But I do it like ten times a week. Right? Like, I know I fix this. Why isn't it working? Right? Just go back and run. Make try it again. Make is the command that we use to do the compiling for us so we don't have to type all the commands. Right. Okay. So I'm now going to run those commands or I'm going to re compile rather. And then if I run my program it prints Hello world so pound include as he said. Okay H told the preprocessor actually to tell the compiler that a function called puts exists then I call puts I tell it what I want to print and it will print it. Now if I take out this pound, include studio knowledge. It's going to say, I don't I don't know that function. But this is a fancy way of saying, I don't know. The function puts implicit declaration of function means that I am declaring that a function puts exists by using it, so therefore it must exist. But the compiler doesn't know anything about it. Now it turns out in this particular case, C also has warning it compiled anyway and it will actually run. But in many, many cases it will crash after it says something like that because it will make assumptions about that function that are not true. Right? You should always silence all of the warnings when you run, when you're working on your programs. I will tell you a fun story. It's true. The first time I taught this class, it kid comes in my office and he says, I can't. If I have a bug, I can't find it. I don't know what's happening. I just can't find it. I said, okay, sit down. We'll we'll find it. First thing I said was, Oh, let me see. Can you run your code? You know, so I can see because it runs for a while and then it crashes. Right. Let me just see what's happening. So he sits down, he compiles the code. 97 warnings, 97 warnings. I'm not making this number up. 97 warnings. I looked at him and I said, I think you should fix those warnings before we try to figure out what the problem with your code is. And he said, no. He looked me right in the eyes. He said, I checked those warnings. It's not it. I said, You did not check 97 warnings. Like I know you didn't check 97 warnings. No student has ever checked 97 warnings. Here's the secret to 97 warnings. 97 warnings is one typo, right? Like a wrong, an incorrect type or a variables misnamed or something like that. Right. You fix it. And 93 of the warnings go away. Right? You fix one line. So I said you fix your 97 warnings and I'll look at this again. Sit right there, fix your code. I'll look at this again. He sits there for like 5 minutes. He looks out and he gets more and more puzzled and confused and he's getting frustrated and finally looks up and he says, I don't know what happened. He said, I'm going to have to come back later. He said, I fixed the warnings and now I can't reproduce the bug. And I was like, That's one lesson you could take out of this. The other lesson is that one of those warnings was a bug, right? And when you fixed it, it went away and now your program works, right? Right. The compiler knows when you've done something that doesn't smell right. Right. So fix your warnings before you get too excited about things not working. All righty. Any questions? Is any of this? Does anyone find any of this helpful or are you just like, why are you talking? I'm not willing to take honest answers trying to figure out how to get to my other monitor. Okay. All right. Well, let's do a more complicated example. Actually, let's look at an error. So coming from Python. Why do you do this to me, Max? I know you're trying to help, but I'm trying to make code. That's actually wrong. It's surprisingly hard to make code that's actually wrong in Emacs because it's like shoo. That's not what you mean. Let me. Let me try harder in Python. This is fine, right? I can puts Hello world with single quotes, single quotes and a string and see single quotes is not a string. Single quotes is a character. So if I try to do this and see, it's going to be this big old freakin warning here. Warning character constant too long for it's type C loves to give you warnings that like as a newbie, they make no sense. Like, what do you mean character constant too long for it's type warning passing argument. One of puts makes a pointer from an integer without a cast. I use the wrong type out. What all this tells me is I use the wrong type. It turns out that in C single quotes is a character, not a string. A single character like a letter, right? Not a string. And in C, a letter is a number. Every number, every letter in the alphabet is assigned a particular numeric value. The capital letter A is 65, for example. And so what it's saying is I have declared a number capital letter H, which is whatever 65 plus H minus A is right. 6546. B, c d e, f g h. That's eight. So like 72, something like that. I tried to give 72 to a function that wanted a string, and the function that wants the string is like, I don't know what to do with your 72 buddy. Like, I just don't know what a 72 is. And furthermore, I told the compiler, not only do I want a 72, I also want whatever the number for O is and all these things. And can you just take these numbers and smash them together for me? And then compilers like, No, that's not actually a thing I do. I don't smash numbers together. Like I can add them if you want me to, but I can't smash them together. And so it's complaining, right? So just be aware that syntax differs from language Language. You've already seen this with Java, right? In Java, single quotes are not a string, right? And C single quotes are not a string. There are other things that will be different between the languages, you know, and c just syntactically different. There's nothing wrong with single quotes. Being a C is just that. It being a string is just an in C, they're not a string, right. So we can use that to our advantage. We can actually put we can actually print characters on the screen. So there's a function put care, which puts a character to the screen instead of a string. And I can put care H And I'm going to high because nobody's got time for Hello World. And I can put care and I and then I can put care. This is a little bit strange. Backslash n backslash n is a character turn right. Like I hit enter at the end of the line. But I can also put care 72. And I can put care. I have a cheat code here, 1 to 5 and I can put care ten because the why are those in single quotes? And it's happy with that, right? There's no warnings there. Oh, I got confused. Right. These other errors are from a previous. Right. It's happy. When I run this, I said hi twice because Capital H is just a number. It happens to be 72 lowercase I's just a number. It happens to be 105. Right. And I can put those out one character at a time. Do I want to put them out? One character at a time? Not usually. It's much more convenient to just say hi in my double quotes, right? But sometimes I want to do that and I can do that. Now, last question. I'm not going to use the top hat for this. I'm going to ask you if I want to print a capital H, just a capital H, should I say put care 72. No. Why not? You shake your head first. You're the first one here. I should use a H, Right. It's an H. I want an H. I should use h. I'm going to give you assignments where you're going to do the equivalent to put care 72. Right. Because, like, it's the first thing that occurs to you. But remember that, like, use the representation that is most natural to the programmer. If you want an H, call it an H. Don't call it a 72, because when I come back six months from now to work on this file and this is what it says. What is this crap? I don't know what this is. Right. If it says this. Come on. Like I have questions, but I can tell what it's doing. Right. Okay. Thank you very much. I will see you on Friday morning. You all have labs in the next three days. Please go to your labs. If you have, like, technical problems or whatever, we will help you with them there. Now a few. 