Most of you probably. Welcome to. And now see why this chair was here. Welcome to fall semester. Right. I have an 8:00 this morning. Nice. When I was in grad school, they canceled all of the grad classes for computer science students before 9 a.m. because they were like, We started at seven though. Purdue started at seven because they were like, Why do these exist? Like nobody has ever gone to one, so they just cancel them all. Not saying you should not go to your early classes because it probably won't work that way. But undergrads, you just got to put up with what you put up with. Okay. So welcome to CSC to 20. Welcome to Fall semester. I'm glad to see there are so many of you here right now. We will, as you saw, because you all read the syllabus when it was made available to you. We will be taking attendance this semester. We will be taking attendance potentially rather early in the class period. So please make sure that you're here and ready to go at 9 a.m. Why? Why don't you work? Yeah. All right, So first thing you need to know is who am I and how do you get was probably not the first thing you need to know, but the first thing I'm going to tell you, who am I and how do you get a hold of me? My name is Ethan Blanton. I am one of two instructors on this course. The other instructor on this course is Carl Alphonse. Many of you may know Carl, you could have had him for 115 or seen him somewhere else. You probably have not seen me before unless you've been in 220 previously because I don't teach anything lower than 220 anymore. I used to teach 199. Victoria had me in 199. You didn't take 199? Yeah, but anyway, this is probably first time you're seeing me. You can find me in Davis 334 and that is in Davis Hall, past the restrooms on the third floor. Walk past the restrooms, turn left. There's a big, long hallway that goes down towards the atrium at the back end of the building on Grace Plaza. I'm like the third from the last door on the right or something like that. You the first time you go there, you'll be like, This can't possibly be the right place. I'm in the wrong place. He's not here. After that, people will have found me and you'll know where I am because there's a huge line of students outside the door. It won't be a problem. Right now. My office hours are Mondays at 10 a.m. I probably will not have office hours today. As you notice, I'm wearing a mask. I will not normally be wearing a mask, but some Canadian royalists or something gave me COVID last week, so I'm on my 10th day of masking and I don't want necessary. I mean, I'm probably not contagious because of how these things work, but I don't necessarily want to be enclosed spaces with the bunch of you on the first day of classes, give you all COVID and then us all have to deal with that next week. So I probably won't hold office hours today and I'm going to keep a little bit of distance. I will probably add one more office hour at some point this semester. So it's not just Monday morning, but my schedule is not finalized yet, mostly because my Tas can't tell me when they're available. They're so slow, but as soon as they tell me when they're available, when we get to meetings and such schedule, I will schedule another office hour and then, you know, I'll let you know when that is. The syllabus is on the UAB, I'm sorry is on the course web page. These slides are on the course Web page. All of the other material that I put up for this course, except for assignments and labs, will be on the course web page. And all of the material for this course will be on. You've learned now you'll be learned this semester is bright space. There's a whole big story for why it's not Blackboard anymore. Of course, Blackboard was garbage. I've been using bright space for a couple of weeks now, and I can confirm to you that bright space is garbage. So it wasn't because bright space is better than Blackboard, but it is definitely different from Blackboard, which means that we don't know how to use it yet. So bear with us if there's any confusion on bright space. All right. Any questions so far? I haven't said anything yet. Right. So there's no questions. So this semester we are going to be using top hat. I don't like top hat. You don't like top hat? Why don't you like top hat? You have to pay for it, right? Why do I like top hat? Because you have to pay for it. And I don't mind it when you pay for things that are good. But Top Hat is a web app. Has any of you have any of you ever used a web app? That was good. That's right. Nobody's ever used a Web app. That's good. However, we looked at all of our options, it appeared to be the least of the evils. We are using top hat. This semester I am going to run a Top Hat poll right now. There will be several top hat polls and a top hat quiz today. In class, they will not count. And they will not count because many of you may not have your top hat set up yet. However, starting next week, they will count. If you don't do them, you will lose points in the class. If you don't do enough of them, you will fail the class. Right. So this is sort of a dry run. The first question we're going to do is a simple poll. I'm going to ask you to pick the option from the following, which best describes your situation. You're just going to answer it. There's no right answers. There's no wrong answers. Right. This is just a poll. But it helps us get an idea for the demographics of the class and for you to see, you know, who around you, not who around you, but there may be people around you who are in your situation. Every time we run one of these questions in class, we will give you between 30 and 45 seconds to put in an answer. Usually we will then discuss the answer and then we will have a follow up question. If you took 115 here, you be you're familiar with this procedure. The question here is pick the option which best describes you continuing. You be student or new transfer student. I don't think there's any other possibility in 220, but like if neither of these things fit you, then you know, we'll talk about it afterwards, because I'd be interested to know. That's just great. This is a great website. Okay, we're out of time. How do I look at the responses? Let's look at the responses. 62 of you who answered right now. So there's 150 people in this section. I don't feel like there's 150 people here right now. So some of them are having trouble adjusting to getting up in the morning. This gentleman, for example, is having trouble adjusting to getting up in the morning. There should be 150 people in this section and of course, only 82 answered. Of that, we can see the little more than 10% of the people who are here, which is probably an overrepresentation. If you were a transfer student, it's very likely not 100% likely, but very likely that you're coming from community college, which probably means that you have had to manage your own schedule. Maybe you've even had a job or you've done something useful in your life, which means you're here at 9 a.m. If you're a continuing U. B student, it's possible that your mom was fixing your food and doing your laundry yesterday, right? And so maybe they're not here yet. So new transfer students are probably overrepresented here. Yeah, overrepresented here. But you see that more than 10% of the students in this class sitting here today who answered this poll are transfer students. What does that mean? It means you didn't take 115 here or 116 here, 115 and 116 or the pre recs for this course. Right. It does, however, mean that you had some equivalent of 115 or 116 and you theoretically know all of the things that we would teach in 115 and 116. However, you probably haven't used nobody's use bright space, right? It's new to all of us. It's new trash for everybody. But you haven't used the other cube systems you haven't used, etc. It's fine. We'll get you through it. Right. It'll be a lot here in the first couple of weeks, but it's fine. It'll be fine. Those of you who are continuing, Congratulations. Thank you for coming back. You pay my salary. I don't think that's true. I think the taxpayers of New York pay my salary. I don't get salary. But if I did. But thank you for coming back. Everything should be familiar to you. There's not going to be a lot of new procedure necessarily. However, this is going to be a different experience from your 100 level experience and your 100 level experience. You had a lot of hand-holding in your 200 level experience. You're going have a lot less hand-holding. When you get to 304 hundred, you will have even less hand-holding. At some point in your career. You're going to show up on the first day of class. The faculty member in the front of the room is going to say, Hey, there's a final project is due on the last day of classes. See you in 15 weeks. Right. And then it's your problem, right? We're somewhere in between the two extremes of 115 where they're like, okay, open your web browser. Okay, type in a URL. Okay, click at the top left hand side of the screen. Does everybody see the top left hand side of the screen? Does everybody have a screen? Right. We're somewhere between that and see you in 15 weeks, Right? Okay. Any questions? That. So what is this course? We're 10 minutes and I haven't talked about this course yet. This course, it's called systems programing. What it's about. What is it about? It's about systems programing. What is systems programing? Systems programing is the computer, the operating system, the services, all of the things that are underneath the programs that you write. You're here because you're a computer scientist or you're a computer engineer. You're going to be developing software, developing hardware, developing applications for computer systems. All of those computer systems have some underlying infrastructure on which your stuff runs. And up until this point, you've taken that for granted. You've said, okay, whatever, there's a computer down there, I'm just going to want 15 116 less so in 116 than 115. You did it like literally in your web browser, right? Like, yeah, you had a computer, but it didn't matter. It could have been a phone, it could have been a Chromebook, it could have been a surface tablet, it could have been an iPad, whatever. It didn't matter because the computer that you were running on is somewhere else. And it just, you know, just whatever you have a web browser that you're typing into, right? But the software that you run ultimately runs on actual computers. And those actual computers affect not only the way that we write software and the kinds of software that we write, but when you write software excuse me, the way that software will run and what constitutes correct software and efficient software and software that is pleasant and correct to use. Every one of these computers that you use has an architecture. The architecture is decisions that was made by computer engineers at some point along the line about how the computer is put together, how does it communicate between its various different parts? What kinds of instructions is it capable of running? What kinds of things does it know how to do? We will teach you a little bit about that. You will learn more about that later. When you take computer organization and other courses, computer engineering students, you will eventually design little bits of architecture and things like that before you leave this university. We are also going to teach you the C programing language and the POSIX API API stands for Application programing Interface. It is a set of effectively functions that are available to you on. In the case of POSIX Unix like operating systems. We'll talk more about that later. Our goals in this class are to improve your intuitions about how computers work. So when you go to solve a problem, you say, I have some idea of how to solve this problem because I know how the computer needs to think about this problem. And second, to give you practice and experience solving real problems using programs, not little problems and toy problem, all other kind of little problems and toy problems because this is only your second year. Right. But bigger problems, larger problems where you have more control over the degrees of freedom that you have than you have previously seen. So programing does not occur. This is systems programing, right? This is a programing course. What you should expect to do in this course is a lot of programing. What you should expect to get out of this, of course, is learning and experiencing things about programing. Programing does not occur in a vacuum. The systems on which we run our programs have greatly influenced not only the programs that we write, but also the way that we write those programs. What languages do we use? How do those languages work? How do they represent the data that they use? What kinds of control structures do they provide to us? What kinds of algorithms are efficient and run well and give us correct results? Those are all affected by the actual computer and the architecture and the system on which we run the programs. And our goal is to help you understand that stuff underneath so that you can write better programs that are more correct, more quickly, more easily, and with less pain. How many of you would like to program with less pain? That's why we're here. That's why we're here. Those of you who didn't raise your hands, I see you. Okay. Of course. Difficulty. This is probably the hardest course you've ever taken. It will probably be the hardest course that you take for the next couple of semesters. If it's not, it's because 250 is the hardest course that you will take. Or maybe 331 is the hardest course that you'll take in the next couple of semesters. However, it is not a weed out course. Why is it not a weed out course? What does UAB want from you? Your tuition money, right? That's what they want from you. If you fail out of you, what do they get from you? Not your tuition money. Right. I don't care about that. They don't give me your tuition money, right? They don't give it to me. I'm here because I want to teach. Listen. So I worked in academia or I worked in the industry for a few years. I did some teaching, and I came back to academia because I wanted to teach. I'm teaching systems programing because I love systems. I want to teach systems. And when I say systems, I mean anything that has little bits and bobs and gadgets that you can poke and turn and play with and put in different configurations and see how things work, right? I love mechanical systems. I love electronic systems. I love software systems. It's all, to me just amazing. What does that make me? A nerd? It makes me a nerd. But that's fine, because most of you are nerds, too. It's okay if you haven't come to terms with that part of your identity yet, but in time, it'll be okay. I'm here because I love this. I don't care about your tuition money. They don't give it to me anyway. I wish they did. There's so much tuition money in this room. Was this like. I mean, it's like $1,000,000 or something, right? Just this semester, and I don't get whatever. So this is not a weed out course. I want you to love systems. You be. I want you to pass. So you keep giving them that sweet, sweet dough, right? However, this course is very difficult. Why is it difficult? The material that we're covering is unavoidably precise and unforgiving. The computer is the magic genie from the tales of of old, where you. It gives you three wishes and it gives you precisely what you asked for. Even if what you what it gives you is not what you wanted, right? The computer gives you exactly what you asked for. No more and no less. And if you ask it for the wrong thing, it happily gives you the wrong thing. Right. And we can't get around that. The higher you go up the programing stack, the farther you get from the actual computer architecture, the more those unforgiving details may be hidden from you. The lower you go in the stack, the closer you get to the actual hardware in the computer, the less those details are hidden from you. We're pretty far down that stack in this class. So if you don't do things exactly the way the computer wants it, it just doesn't work. It's nobody's fault. Well, computers kind of suck, and that's somebody's fault, right? But it's nobody in this room's fault. It's just the way it is. So that's the thing. 2xx courses provide you less guidance than 1xx courses. Right. That's going to make this course more difficult. We are going to give you longer time frames to get your work done and less guidance on how to do your work. Some of you will choose to take those longer time frames and do your work later. You'll regret it, right? You'll regret it the first time. And then you'll say, I won't do this the second time. The first time might be okay. Right. It's usually like the second time or the third time where you really regret it, Right? And you say, I won't do that next time. And then you'll do it. Next time. You'll do it next time. And eventually the semester will be over and you will have never learned your lesson, but hopefully it'll stick with you. And sometime in the future you'll start your projects when they're handed out, not when they're due. As Matt Hurts is fond of saying. We say due date and students here do date. Right? When I say due date, I mean you should have this done long before this time, right? Tas How far in advance should they start the projects? Day one. Day one. Why? Yeah. Read the hand on day one. But why should they start on day one? It takes time. Right. If you start on day one. Is the project easier? Yeah. Yeah. Right. See? History, experience. Speak to you, by the way. Let me introduce. We only have two days. I was hoping we get more. Do we have any other Tas in the room? Anybody in the back? No. We have two teaching assistants here in the front. Victoria and Sean. There are 31 teaching assistants on this course. You will meet many of them throughout the course of the semester. There will be two teaching assistants assigned to your lab section, who you will see every week, and Tas will be holding office hours throughout the week. We'll talk more about that later. And then the third irony said this The third reason is success in this course requires careful time management. Many of you have not had to manage your time this carefully before. You may think you have, but you have not. If you are taking 330, one or 250 at the same time as 220. Get a calendar. Put your stuff on it. Schedule work every day of the week and keep up on it. You'll have a great semester if you don't do those things. You'll survive. You'll probably pass your courses and you will say never again. Right. You will get out of this course, what you put into it. If you show up, I realize it's 9 a.m., and that's rough for a lot of people in this room. If you show up ready to learn and ready to be interested in this material, to the degree that you can bring yourself to be interested in this material and you try to understand the work and you put effort into the work, you will get so much out of this course. You will grow as a programmer, you will grow as a computer scientist, you will grow as a computer engineer, and you will find this a rewarding and valuable course. I promise. I promise it's a great course. Not just because I designed it, although that might have something to do with it. But it's just interesting material. It's valuable material. You will be glad that you had it. All right. I'm never going to get through my slide. It's going to go faster. All right. For this course, we expect that you will be responsible, respectful adults. In return. I'm not going to read all these points because I'm behind. But you should read them later. If you behave as adults and strive to maximize the learning experience, this is going to be great for everybody in return. We will be respectful, responsible adults. We will do our best to help you learn. When you have questions. We will be there to answer them and we will stay to the end. Now, if your questions come 8 minutes before the due date, we will be happy to answer them. The following Monday because that will be like 11:52 p.m. on Friday night or whatever, and we're not doing CSC 220 at that time. Right. But we will try to give you complete correct and valuable answers to your questions. We will try to understand where you are in learning the course material, and we will try to help you become an independent learner who can learn these things on your own without having to come see us every time you have a question. Not because we don't want to see your questions, but because you have 20 more years of career ahead of you in which you don't necessarily want to have to run to somebody every time you have a question. Our goal is to help you learn how to learn. You bring to this what you want to get out of it, and we will return that with at least as much energy. That is our promise to you. If you have any bad experiences in this course with other classmates, with core staff, with whatever, come see me. Right. Come see Karl. If you're not comfortable coming to see me or Karl because you're bad experiences with me or whatever. Go see the directors of undergraduate studies. Right. Let us know where we fail to uphold our end of the bargain so that when you uphold your end of the bargain, you get everything that you can. All this course. And this should go for every course that you take here you be. If it is not a good time and it is not a good time because the people are disrespectful, the courses badly run, etc. etc. Let somebody know, right? That is our responsibility to you is to provide an environment in which you can learn. Any questions? This is syllabus day, right? So sorry about that. We will get to real material by the end, I promise. Lecture attendance is mandatory. Thank you. For those of you who are here right now, those of you who came in between 9 a.m. and now be earlier next time. That will. That's like 40 people, right? It will get easier as the course goes on. The things like having to wait forever to get through the roundabouts and not being able to find parking spaces and whatever gets better after the first week of classes, you all know that. So please be here at 9 a.m. We will not repeat lectures. Labs will not repeat lectures. If you missed something in lecture, you just missed it. You are expected to catch up on your own. We will provide lecture videos. They will go up some time after class. Not immediately. Probably not. I actually need to check that. I don't think they go for me. You remind me to check that, but they will go up some time after class. We do some editing before we release them. Lab attendance is mandatory. We will track it. You will practice in lab what you learn in class. Everything that you do in lab shows up on an assignment. If you do a lab and you say this isn't related to anything, I don't know why I'm doing it. It has nothing to do with this course. You're doing it wrong. Come ask us questions. It will show up on an assignment. You will be able to take the things you learn in lab, apply them directly to your assignments, and get points which will move you towards graduating from this course. Attendance will be monitored and required. This semester is a new thing. We'll see how this goes. We have not done this in the past, but we have had have problems the last few semesters. Not with you guys. You guys are a new crop, right? So COVID broke things, right? We all know this other than the fact that I'm sweating my face off right now. COVID broke things. It broke people's work habits, their willingness to show up in physical situations, etc., etc. And we have had problems with attendance slacking off, with students not paying attention, etc., that are some they're not your fault. They're not our fault. They're sort of a societal problem that we're having right now. You all are one more year past that broken year, right when everybody stayed home for a year. So hopefully you won't have the experiences that last semester did. But we're taking attendance to try to, you know, improve that situation. All right. Students who fail or resign CSU 2 to 20 often do so because they don't come to lecture, they don't come to lab, they start their assignments late, They don't ask questions until it's too late, etc., etc. There's a whole list of things here. Don't do those things. If you have a question, come ask it. We are nice people. I'm not a nice person. I pretend to be a nice person while you're asking questions to me. Right. Your Tas are actually most of them nice people. Right. Carl is actually a nice person. He's an unbelievably nice person. I don't understand how he does it. It's kind of creepy, actually, but it's fine. He's super nice, right, Carl? Super nice. You guys know Carl. So come ask us questions. We will help you. Don't wait until you're so lost. You don't know what question to ask. As soon as you know you have a question, come ask us. We'll help you. It'll be great. Don't cheat. Please don't cheat. Every semester I fail tons of students for cheating. It doesn't have to be that way. If you're lost, ask us. Don't cheat. Don't panic and cheat. Right. Most students who cheat don't do it because they're bad people and they get up in the morning and they're like, I would love to cheat in this course. That is my goal for today. I have 3 hours, right? They get up, they don't work on their assignment. It's the last minute it's due. They're not getting any points. They're like, My average is too low. I'm going to fail the course. Okay, Let me just go see what I can find on StackOverflow. Let me go check CBT or whatever. I'm going to fail. I can't do it. Don't do that. Come see us. If you have a problem, come see us. Ask. We'll get you through it, I promise. We have a very good record of getting people through it when they actually come ask any questions. There's a whole video about cheating that you have to watch. I'm not going to go over it anymore now. Most lectures will have both optional and required readings. You must read the required readings. It's in the word write. Required readings. You must read the required readings. The required things will all be from K and R. Can I see your cane? R? This is K and R occurring and Ritchie the C programing language. This is widely believed to be not just in computer science, but like in the industry as well as in like the technical publishing industry. One of the best books that's ever been written on a technical topic, they use this book in technical writing courses to show people how they should write technical books, right? The C programing language. This is your only required textbook for this course. Thank you very much. Appreciate it. We will also give you required readings that are from free materials that you can either access through your B libraries account or online, or that we will provide to you or whatever. There will be other readings. There is an optional textbook Computer Systems A Programmers Perspective by Brian and O'Halloran. It used to be required, but it's really expensive. And now that we're asking you to pay for top hat, we're not going to ask you to buy App. It's a really good book though, so you might at some point either check it out in the library or take a look at it or even buy a copy of it to be able to to reference it now and going forward. It is a really good book. We will have optional readings from that will optional readings from other materials. The optional readings you are not required to read to pass this class. There will not be any direct questions from the optional readings that we do not cover otherwise in class that appear on exams, quizzes, etc. etc. But we do feel that they are valuable or we would not have provided them. Our primary forum for assistance in this course will be Piazza. Almost all of you have probably used Piazza before. You should all have been added to Piazza if you added this course to your schedule in just the last like 24 or 48 hours, you may not be on Piazza. I will get to it. I will get you added read. So there's a bunch of Penn posts right now, and I know it's a firehose, but there's like at seven, at eight, at nine, at ten, I think 12 or something like that. Right. Are all pinned post. Read them please read them. Read at seven. Absolutely read at seven. If you don't follow the guidelines in at seven and you ask the question on Piazza, we're going to reply at seven. And you need to go back and read at seven and figure out what you did wrong. We're not doing that because we're mean. We're doing that for two reasons. One, the world has rules, and if you follow those rules, you will do better in life. Two, By the end of the semester, there will be something like 4000 posts on Picasa, which something like with something like 20 or 25,000 individual interactions with students on Piazza. We can't keep up. If you don't file, if you don't do your part, we can't do our part. So we hit you with that seven. We wait for you to come back. If you see a question that might be related to your question, read it. Read the answer. See if it answers your question. If it doesn't ask anyway. Right. Or if you're not sure, ask anyway. But please do do your due diligence. Check Piazza regularly. I'm never going to get through this light. A significant portion of your course grade will be projects. They're individual projects. You will write them in C, We will give you the environment in which to write them. We will use a computer called Iman, dot, CSC, dot, buffalo dot edu. Teaching yourself C is a learning objective. In this course, we are going to help you do that. We are going to talk a lot about C here in this first week. We are going to talk about C throughout the semester, but there will be things about C that you will have to teach yourself. That's fine. You've already learned two programing languages previously, right? You can learn a third at minimum, right? You can learn a third. We will get you through it. But keep in mind that there may be things there in that book right there in K in are there may be things you will need to read, understand, and maybe even practice on your own in order to be comfortable in this course. We're providing you a timesharing system to use development. It is iman, dot cc, dot, buffalo dot edu. It's a shared computer that we will all use. It provides a uniform environment that is the same as the environment under which we will be grading your projects if it runs on demand. Our promise to you is that it will run on the greater you will access it using a tool called Extra Check. I think it's at nine. So that nine eight something on Picasa has information about how they check and connect to it. You will need to learn it's a UNIX machine. It's a Linux machine. You will need to learn how to use a Linux machine for this course. Not like a lot, but a little bit. We will help you do that right. We will teach you a little bit about how to do that. Before I go on. Our next question. What is your prior level of experience with the C programing language? I've never heard of C. I've heard of it, but I've never programed in it. I have minimal programing experience in C where I have substantial programing experience and see others up to 97 of you. That's great. Again throughout the semester. Normally what I'll do is I'll ask questions like this and then we'll do them once and then we'll discuss the results and then we'll do them again. If you took 115 here, you'll be familiar with this. So nobody's never heard of it. That's great. You heard about it like 3 minutes ago, if nothing else. Right, when I held up the book. But very few of you have done any meaningful program in programing. And see, guess what? We know that it's okay. This course is structured to teach you to see that you need to absolutely have to get your hands onto the problem and to provide you with the resources that you need to become good at the problem. Any questions? Okay. Your primary source of assistance for your projects will be your teaching assistants. You've met two of them. They're not scary people. Right. To get the most out of your Tas, you need to again put into this course what you expect to get out of it. Have questions. Ask them clearly. Tell them what you actually did. Tell them what didn't work. If you come in and say, I don't want my programs crashing, what do I do? We're going to say you should fix your program. Because that's not a question we can answer. If you come in and say, every time I access what looks like it's probably the 13th element of this array. When I am processing this particular input, my program crashes. Then we will be able to say, Hey, there's some reason for that and we can discuss what that reason is and help you fix it. Right now, in many cases, your problem will be somewhere in between those extremes. You won't just come in and say, My program crashes y and you won't come in and say it's crashing exactly here. For this reason, I don't understand why. It'll be somewhere in between. You'll say, I don't understand what the problem is, but when I use inputs that are larger than a certain size, it crashes. Or when I use inputs that are smaller than a certain size of crashes, I don't know where it's crashing or why. That's fine. That gives us something to work with. The more you give us to work with, the more directly we can help you, the more quickly we can get. You move past that and on to making points in this course. Don't ask for help if you haven't even tried to understand the problem. That's something that students very often do. Coming in from 115 and 116, you say, I don't know. It just doesn't work. Try to understand it. Right. We cannot hold your hand for everything. And don't start the last minute. If you start at the last minute, what's going to happen is you will be like, Great, I just have this one problem. I have to get it solved and then I'll be good. I'll get all my points. You come to office hours and there's 40 people ahead of you and 15 minutes remaining. And you're not going to get help, Right. Because all of those other 40 people just started today, too. In the first week of office hours, your Tas mostly sit around lonely and cry because they don't have any friends there to ask them questions. Right. In the second week of office hours, they mostly live on caffeine and despair because there's so many people asking them questions. Right. Be there in that first week, make them happy, get good answers, spend some quality time with your Tas, get to know them. It'll be amazing. Tools Editors. We're going to talk about some other tools, but in particular editors. I don't care what editor you use, but it should be Emacs. You haven't learned about Emacs yet. You need to use a programmer's editor. A programmer's editor is one that gives you syntax highlighting automatic indentation matching of your braces, parentheses, brackets, quotes, etc. and is extensible that you can write macros, programs, etc. to run within your editor to help you work. If you come to us and you're using rep lit or notepad plus or something like that, we're going to say, I can't I can't help you with this because you're not trying to write. Go get programmers out here and come back. All right? I don't care what programmers that are. It is I really strongly, deeply encourage you to try. Emacs is provided for you. We will give you assistance with it. There's a config that set up. Just use this class. It's on Amazon. Please try it before you come back and tell us that you don't like it, which you will if you try it, but you won't. If you don't, you have assignments starting already. Read the syllabus, which you've already done because you would do that for you. Show up for the first day of any class. Watch the academic integrity video on Panopto, which some of you have done by the beginning of Lab this week. If you don't have a GitHub account, you need to create one. If you can't figure it out, we'll help you do it. But if you have one, when you show up, it will make life easier. Make sure you can log into Riemann, right. That's in at eight or whatever. Watched the lab video and read the lab handout. You should watch the lab video and read the lab handout before you show up for every lab. If you do that, you'll be prepared for the lab. You'll get it done in 2 hours. It'll be amazing. If you don't do that, you won't get it done in the 2 hours. It will not be amazing. You'll be in office hours asking for it when you should be working on your projects. By Wednesday of next week. You must take the Academic Integrity quiz. It's on bright Space. We do have labs this week. You must go to your lab this week. Labs are Wednesday, Thursday and Friday from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. All day, all three days. You have an assigned lab. You need to go to your assigned lab. It's on your hub in order to pass this course. Not only do you have to come here and listen to me talk, but you also have to do five things beyond meeting the rubric, the simple rubric in the syllabus. You must complete the eye quiz with a perfect score. You have unlimited tries. You must complete lab one with a perfect score. You have unlimited tries. But really, if you just read the instructions, you'll get it on the first try. If you don't get it on the first try, you just learn something about how carefully you read instructions. And you should take that with you. You must have at least a 60% weighted exam average. The calculation is in the syllabus. You must have at least a 60% lab exam average. There will be three lab exams this semester. We will come in the lab. We will ask you to a small, small lab size programing assignment. You will have to do it within the 2 hours of your scheduled lab. We will grade it. You must have a 60% average on those, and you must attend. According to our top out attendance metric, at least 30 of the lectures in this course, there's like 44 or something or 43 or something lectures. In this course you have to attend at least 30 of them. If you fail to achieve any one of these things, you could have an 80% average in this course and you will fail it with an F. Now, the fact is I have had component failure in this course for like, I don't know, probably five of the seven or eight semesters that I've taught it. No one has ever failed for component failure because they fail for other reasons. Right? If you don't have 60% on your lab exams, you probably also don't have 60% on your exams and you didn't get 60% on your assignments and whatever, right? I mean, and you just failed the course. But it could happen. Pay attention. In particular, the people who that would not be the case. It turned out to not be the case because usually they fail for cheating. Some people will get like perfect scores on all their assignments and they show up in lab and they don't know how to log in to the computer. And it's like usually they feel for cheating. It's not a problem. Any questions? So why are we using the C programing language? It's ancient, right? 1972 or something. 71. Right. It's ancient. Why are we using C? It's a beautiful language. It is a high level language, but it's not very high level. It gives us exposure to the way that the computer actually does its calculations. This courses systems programing and systems programing. What we care about is how the computer does its calculations. So that exposure is good, right? But it also gives us functions, it gives us data types, it gives us structures, it gives us many abstractions that we can use to operate our data so we can use it to write radio programs. There are other languages that give us deep visibility into the way the computer runs, like assembly language. You learn a similar language in 341, but it's so difficult to write assembly language that you really can't get past those architectural details to write real programs. In C, you can both see the architectural details and write real programs. Most operating system kernels are written in C. The inner core of your operating system is probably written and see whether you run Linux, Mac OS Windows, etc. It's probably written in C Now much of the Windows, we don't know about the Windows kernel because it's closed source, but allegedly much of the Windows kernel is written in C++. A portion of the Mac OS kernel is written in C++, but in Mac OS and Linux Mac OS the inner core is C Linux. The entire kernel is C seven. Now maybe there's a little bit of rust and windows. I cannot help but believe the very inner core must be in C because you have to have some sort of platform on which to rest your C++. Furthermore, C has influenced many, many languages that you will use Java, JavaScript, even Python, right. Which looks nothing like C has influences of C in it in the way that functions are called in the way they operate. Right? Many languages have been influenced by C There are other languages that are as influential as C, and you should probably seek them out and learn them sometime in your career. We're going to teach you see, right now those other languages are things like Lisp Write. Lisp is an example of another very influential language. Effective C programing requires that you master the machine many of the languages you may have seen before, many things that you have learned before don't require you to master the machine you're running in some sort of virtual playground far above the actual machine, which you can't see through the clouds below. In C, you have to master the machine. You must be aware of its architecture and the details of its implementation or your programs will run inefficiently, will be slow, will crash, will violate expectations of the architecture. It turns out these things are often true of the higher level languages too. It's just that then your program is slow and you don't know why. In C you can see why because the machine is right there. We will specifically be using C on Linux on x86 64. If those things don't mean anything to you, that's fine. Linux is an operating system. Operating system Kernel x86 64 is a hardware architecture. My laptop is x86 64. If you have a non mac laptop, your laptop is almost certainly x86 64. You have a mac laptop. It might be an architecture called ARM, which is just another type of machine. It is the actual instructions that the machine knows how to run. The dialect of C that we will use is C 99. That is a version of C that was standardized in 1999. The compiler that we use is called GTC, the new compiler collection. If these things don't mean anything to you, that's okay. We will learn more about them later in the semester. If you wish to set up your own development environment, these are the things you need to know in order to do that. That said, CSC 220 is not just about learning. C. C is a tool that we will use to look at the way that the computer runs. It's a good towards a valuable tool. It's a tool you should know for your career, but it's really just a tool. We are not going to cover all of the details of the C syntax, but we will cover the key ideas and we will cover the things that reflect on the architectures that we really want to talk about teaching yourself. C is going to help you learn to learn new languages. For most of you, it will be at least your third programing language. If you took 199 here with Matt Napoli, you may also know Cork, in which case maybe it's your fourth. But I think we can all agree that that language is not like other languages in order to teach yourself. C There will be some resources provided to you the C programing language, you Unix expand pages and we will give you tons of good commented code that you should read and try to understand. In this course. I will attempt to be precise. I will attempt to tell you exactly how things work. No more and no less. But there are times that I am going to lie to you. I'm going to lie to you to simple. The five things, because either the details are something we don't need to know now and they're unnecessarily complex, or because they require you to have knowledge that you're not yet expected to have. This is like when you take physics, right? When you take physics, they tell you if you hold something in the air and you drop it, it's going to fall at 9.8 meters per second, per second, right? And you're like, great, 9.8 meters per second, Per second. You write the down equals 9.8 meters per second, per second. And then later you learn that on earth at sea level. And if I'm on a mountain, it falls a little bit slower. And if I'm deep in the Mariana Trench, it falls a little bit that well, it doesn't because there's water there. Right? But if there wasn't water, there would fall a little bit faster. And if I were on Mars or the moon or less. Now, let's talk about special relativity and the curvature of space time. Right. But when you're learning that 9.8 meters per second, per second is how fast things fall, it's fine because if you drop this, it's going to fall at 9.8 meters per second, per second. You don't have to worry about air friction and Mars and whatever. Right. We're going to do some of that in this course. If something I tell you conflicts with the C programing language standard, with the Parsec standard or with what your compiler actually produces, the compiler wins. Because the compiler is the ground truth. Maybe it's a bug, but it is nonetheless what the compiler did right. I will try not to put you in any scenario where that matters, but keep that in mind. If I say something that is a lie is an oversimplification, there's more to it. It's not actually 9.8 meters per second. Per second, because the speed of light. I will put this little sign beside it. I hate this display, this little sign over here that you can't see me pointing out. It's called a pill crow. I won't put a pill crow beside it. If you if I tell you something and there's a crow beside it and you're like, But I happen to know that there's a subtle detail that makes this slightly different. I don't want to hear about it. I know. That's why there's a pinker there, right? And your classmates don't need to know about it. If you have questions, ask, come see me. I'm happy to talk about it. I probably won't talk about it in lecture. I probably will, because often they're interesting. But. All right, Here's our first pill. Crow for the class, right? It's right here. This is a lie. When I'm about to tell you it's a lie. But it is a nice lie that works, right? And so we're going to go with it. Every time you program a computer, it has some model under which it operates. The model under which we are operating is the model of the C programing language, which exposes a particular model of thinking about how the computer operates. In that model, the computer has a data which is stored in memory at addresses that we can access. We'll talk more about what all those things mean later. In this course, the CPU, the central processing unit of the computer, manipulates that data at those addresses stored in memory program code that you write is executed as a series of instructions. Those instructions are also stored in memory, but they may not be accessible to you in the way that the data is. They may not be data that you can read, they may be somewhere else. This is the model of the computer that we're going to use that the C programing language exposes to you. Furthermore, most modern multitasking operating systems, including the POSIX systems that we are going to be talking about in this course, exposed to you a model in which every program that you run appears to run on its own dedicated computer, its own dedicated machine. Every process you run appears from its perspective to have access to an entire computer with a CPU, with RAM, with input output devices, etc. on which no other programs are running. This is not true. Obviously there's more than one program running on your computer. Right. You're aware of this, but it is approximated by the operating system and we will talk about how that happens and what the implications are for the programs that you write, what that means for you to be able to write programs that run in this dedicated machine model and what it means when you need to break out of that dedicated machine model and become aware that there are other processes, other hardware, other things that are not part of your program's little world. All right. I'm going to do one last topic question and then we are going to wrap up. So. And this is a question for everyone in this class. I'm going to give you a list of tools and ask you which ones you were already comfortable using. So there's 97, 114 people, 77 of you answered. I assume the other people either have already packed up for the day, in which case, shame on you don't do that in the future or just aren't familiar with any of these tools. Right. Which means that the maximum we have is 26 of you out of 170 14 have used them before, which is an ED, which means that most of you, the large majority of you don't know and haven't used any of those tools. The moral of this story is that's fine. We're going to teach you how to use these tools. We're going to be asking you to use these tools. We will be showing you how to use these tools. We will be giving you resources for how to become familiar with and comfortable with these tools. When you feel like this is all new, I don't know what any of this is. I don't know where to start. It's fine. There's 93 other people in this room or whatever. I can't do math who are right there with you. Right? If you have questions, ask them. Come see us. All right. I'm going to quit there. It's 951. I apologize for keeping you over for a minute. We will pick up here on Wednesday. I will try to be faster in the future. I will not be faster in the future. 